Good afternoon everybody and welcome
to Streamlining Your Workflow.
I'm Chris Espinosa.
I'm the User Experience Manager in
the Developer Tools Group at Apple.
And I have one and only one
objective for this session today,
which is to highlight the new Xcode
features that help speed your work.
You saw a quick demo of them yesterday
in Ted Goldstein's keynote presentation.
I'm going to take you in-depth to the
new features in Xcode 3.0 in Leopard.
Let's talk about your
Xcode workflow before,
from Xcode 1.0 all the
way on to Xcode 2.4.
I've had a fairly simple workflow.
You acquire a project,
which usually means going to the terminal
and connecting to your subversion or
CVS repository and checking it out,
or maybe you drag something down
using the finder from a server.
Then you edit it in the editor,
and that's worked pretty well.
And then you build it and you
get a build products window,
a build results window on top of
your editor window and then you
can find your errors and warnings.
And then once you get your
errors and warnings resolved,
you debug and you step
through in the debug window.
And then at some point you rewrite
your code and then you have to
reconfigure using... then to rewrite
your code you do some research,
you need to bring up the
documentation window.
Notice where your code is.
It's now buried beneath level
after level after level of window.
And then you reconfigure your project.
You set your build settings,
you bring up the build inspectors,
they're covering up your text file,
and then at some point,
if you want to restore because you've
completely messed things up and you
need to go back to the beginning,
you've got to go all the way
back to the finder and get this
copy that you saved on disk.
We want to cut through all of this
and help you focus on your work.
The really only two things
we're doing in Xcode 3.0:
focusing on your work,
which means bringing the tools
to you right where your source
code is when you need them,
and second is finding and
filtering so that when you do go to
another window to find something,
you can get there fast without
a lot of scrolling around.
And everything we're going to show you
today helps you focus on your work.
work and find and filter.
So, the focus is on your editor
and it doesn't matter whether
you're a one window or a many
windows kind of programmer.
We're pretty much eliminating that
war by bringing all of the tools you
need right into your editor window,
whether it's separate or
whether it's embedded.
If you're editing,
we're going to bring you tools that
focus on your code and help you show
you what you're working on in code
focus and code folding in the editor.
When you're building,
we will bring you your errors and
warnings right to the line of code on
which they occur instead of putting them
in a separate window where you have to
navigate to different files according to
where your errors and warnings are rather
than dealing with your warnings where
they sit in the file you're working on.
When you're debugging,
we will bring you the debug information
right there into your text file
in terms of stepping information,
breakpoint information,
and debug symbolic information right
there in the text file where you work.
This is what we mean
by focus on your work.
So let's work through these four
phases of streamlining your workflow.
First, acquisition of a product,
of a project, and editing that project.
The first step to streamlining project
acquisition is that we've built
repository management right into
the Xcode user interface for CVS,
Subversion, and Perforce.
You don't have to use a different tool,
you don't have to use the
command line in order to connect
to or browse a repository,
to import a new project
into a repository,
to export a project from a repository
into a plain project on disk,
to find different versions or
tags of a project in a repository,
or to create a new tag or
version in a repository.
All of these are handled in
one window built into Xcode and
we're going to show that to you.
Second thing is
streamlining source editing.
Once you have your project and
once you're working on your source,
we're doing a lot to make editing
faster and more intuitive.
You saw in the demo yesterday that
we're handling large files much,
much better.
We can open and scroll to the bottom of
a very large file in a few seconds where
it used to take us 30 or 40 seconds.
It's not just improvements in Xcode but
some improvements in Coco's underlying
text classes that allow us to do that.
We're also improving the syntax
coloring so you see more vividly
on your screen what's a method,
what's a function call,
what's a constant,
not just a bunch of black text on a
white background with occasional pragmas
or macros or comments in one color.
We're helping you get unneeded
detail out of the way by letting you
focus on the particular nested block
of code that you're working on and
dimming back other things and seeing
the block structure of your program
regardless of your indentation style.
I'm sure most of you have had the
experience of getting somebody else's
file and seeing what curious indentation
paradigms that other people tend to use.
Sometimes you really can't
figure out what brace matching
style or what indentation style,
one tab plus two spaces for this level,
they may use.
You can ignore all of that by
using the code focus mechanism in
Xcode 3.0 to see what the block
structure is quickly and easily.
You can also use code folding to
move extraneous code out of the way
and just collapse it so that you can
see just what you're looking for,
just the function names,
just the code without the comments,
or just the function
that you're looking for.
So to demo these features,
we're going to bring up
Dave Ewing of our group.
He has done most of the work on
the Xcode editor and he's going
to talk you through the demo.
Thanks, Chris.
I didn't do all the work.
There's a lot of other
people involved here.
Well, the first thing we're going to do,
well, we want to spend most of our
time in the text editor because
that's where the focus is,
but you can't get to text
without having a project.
You can't get to a project
these days without having it
in a source code repository,
so the new source code
repository management feature.
And this is in the
Xcode preferences where,
could you put the demo machine
on the monitor up here?
Or I can just look back
there all the time,
right?
So that one's not set up.
Well, if we had the repository
set up on that machine,
which it was set up moments ago.
Sorry, we're starting with
setting up the repository.
Oh, well, let's start.
So you can go ahead and click
the plus button down below here
and point to the directory.
In this case,
we have a repository set up on this
machine in the file system so we
can use a file URL to get to it.
You have to name the repository.
Here he's going to type in a file URL.
Let's see if he types well.
And you can see down below there's
a little status that tells you
it's evaluating what he's doing.
So once he gets to the right place,
SVN repository.
And look,
it says connected to the repository.
So good,
we can do that through the preferences.
And then in the SEM menu,
we can bring up the browser.
So this repository has the
AppKit examples imported into it.
You can click through these folders
here and see the source code.
Browsing is very quick.
We also have this other project
that we imported called Xjournal.
And let's go ahead and
check that one out.
We'll just put it on the desktop.
And you can see it's the little
spinny wheel there is spinning.
It takes a few seconds.
There's about 45 megabytes
of stuff in the project.
And when it's done checking it out,
it notices that there's an Xcode project
sitting there at the top level and it,
you know,
helpfully offers to open it for you.
So let's go ahead and open the project.
So here's a new project.
We'll make things a little bigger
so we can get to the text editor.
And the first thing we
want to show you is,
well, the first thing we want to
do is put a file in there.
And we'll open the main
document window for this,
the source code for the
document window here.
The first thing you notice is that it's
a lot more colorful than it used to be.
Now it turns out that, you know,
as the freight train that is
Mac OS X was moving along towards WWDC,
they make you stop and make
a DVD to give to you guys.
Well, we didn't stop working just
because we built a DVD.
So this feature that shows source
code coloring of indexed symbols is
something that's not on your disk,
but it is something that will be
in the final version of Xcode 3.0.
So we're coloring index symbols,
so classes, type defs,
preprocessor macros, method calls.
And it can differentiate between those
symbols that are in your project and
those that are external to your project,
so framework symbols.
So the next thing we want to do
here is show you a little bit of
a demo of what we're doing here.
show you one of the new
features in Code Sense.
So Xcode 2.0 had two ways
of doing code completion.
One is the next completion that
would cycle through the best
guesses that the editor had for you,
and the other one would
bring up the pop-up list.
Well, we wanted to do something that
was a little more similar,
a little more familiar to
people that was a lot like
what's done in Mail and Safari.
So with automatic completion turned on,
you can type right in your editor,
and if we type a few characters there,
it'll offer to complete the rest
of the word right where you are.
And you can hit the tab
key to finish completion.
You don't have to hit a next
completion key or whatever.
The tab key is just too convenient.
So there we typed "for" and it
offered to complete format string.
Let's go ahead and complete that.
And we'll do a little bit more.
Let's--
So in demos you always duplicate
the line above because that's
the easiest thing to do.
So let's see.
So when there's, you can see there's a
little selection there.
There's a selection.
So what happens is it's guessing the
most likely completion for you and when
it selects a little bit at the end,
what that means is that
part is actually unique.
So if you hit the tab key
it will complete to that.
NSUserDefaults of course is
a class that it knows about,
but there's also this
NSDefaultsController
class that it knows about.
Let's go ahead and bring up
the completion list for that.
And you can move around with
the arrow keys to complete.
So this list is still there.
It's still useful.
So if you don't really know
what the name of things are,
you can bring up the list
and backspace and type and
find what you're looking for.
So he's doing a little bit
more here to complete the line.
So we're doing next completion now,
right?
Mm-hmm.
So if you type a character
and you just want to cycle,
you want to quickly insert
the most likely completion,
you hit next completion.
So it's in the edit menu.
It's control period is the
default key binding for it.
And it will just cycle through a
list of the most likely completions.
And you can go ahead and type right away.
You don't have to hit tab key
to finish that completion.
All right.
So let's... Oh, he's completing.
Oh, we can of course complete
inside strings too.
So it knows about the
words that are in the file.
And we're going to delete that.
So let's go ahead and show one
of the perhaps most underused
feature of code completion,
and that's text macros.
So let's go ahead and type the word for.
Now, the most likely completion here is
actually going to be format string
because it's a local variable.
So if you hit next completion,
it should complete to format string.
There we go, it has format string there.
But we also have some text
macros in there for for loops.
So go ahead and hit
next completion again.
Here's a placeholder for a for loop.
And do another one.
Let's say here's one that actually
puts a loop around an NSArray.
We need to change that one for
Objective-C 2.0 now that you don't
have to do all this extra code.
And let's go ahead and delete
that little bit of code.
And select those,
the if-else blocks there.
So the other cool thing about
text macros is that they can wrap
around the current selection.
So if you go up into the Edit menu
and down into Insert Text Macro
and the set of ones for C,
there's an if block down there.
Let's go ahead and,
the farther one down below.
That's a pound if block,
so that's a pre-processed statement.
That works too, but for the demo,
what it does.
I want to do this pound if block.
He likes that one.
So you can insert a
pre-processed macro around it,
so you want to delete some code.
And there we've inserted the if block,
or the preprocessor block.
All right.
Okay, so he's taking a snapshot.
We're going to talk about snapshots
a little later in the show,
but in preparation for that,
we want to take some snapshots.
I think most of you probably saw
Ted's keynote where they showed
a little bit about snapshots.
It's a way to get back to previous
versions of your entire project.
Okay, so the next thing we're
going to show is --
Well, let's see.
It's code focus.
So we have this method here
called commit sheet and it's,
oh, 100 lines longer.
So why don't you scroll down
a little bit so we can see a
little bit more of the method.
And you can see there's
a lot of if statements.
It's not always easy to see exactly
the structure of the file though.
So the new feature in Xcode 3.0 to
help you with this is code focus.
And the way you get to it is
by hovering over this little
ribbon on the left-hand side.
And when you do that, it grays out.
It's a little hard to see on the screen.
You guys have the software so
you can look at it at home,
of course, or in the audience.
But as you hover over,
it's actually animating that block and
it's got a little balance animation.
I can see it from up here.
You guys probably can't see it.
So that lets you focus in.
You can scroll around
a little bit in that.
If you use the mouse wheel,
you can scroll down and see what
little bit of code is highlighted.
So that's good.
I mean, that helps you see the overall
structure of that or little parts of the
structure of the routine because you're,
you know, what's in the view.
But sometimes the routine's big and you
want to see the overall structure of it.
So the way to do that
is with code folding.
You can hide portions of it,
sub-portions, blocks of your code.
Let's go back up to the
beginning of that method.
And when you're hovering over that,
you'll notice that the folding
ribbon there changes a little.
There's a downward and
upward pointing triangle.
And if you click,
it'll actually collapse.
So it's collapsed the whole method there.
Let's go ahead and expand that again
and go down to the first if block.
Right there at the top.
Go ahead and collapse that.
And let's collapse the next else if,
and the next else if,
and the next else if.
And you can see that this
routine has actually got a
pretty simple overall structure.
See the little pound warning up there?
We could really clean this up.
I guess maybe you should be
doing that a little differently,
eh?
Okay, another thing you can do is you
can hide all of your functions.
You can collapse all of them.
So let's go ahead and just use
a contextual menu for that.
So if you control-click.
On the Code Folding menu down inside
it says Fold All Method and Functions.
So go ahead and do that.
And you can see they're all
gone and you can just see the
methods you're interested in.
That's something that people have
been asking for a couple of years now.
So we're very pleased to be
bringing it to you finally.
That one's a little uninteresting.
Let's go ahead and unfold all of
them inside of the contextual menu.
And fold all.
Up above.
Okay, well let's go ahead.
So fold one of those methods.
Any way you please.
So the other thing is there's
that little placeholder there,
the ellipses inside of the box.
You can double click on
that and it unfolds too.
So don't just have to use the ribbon.
There's keyboard equivalents for
all of these menu commands now.
Okay, so let's show one more
thing with code folding.
So let's go ahead and go up to the
top of that file and double click.
There's...
A method for you, LJ or a class.
There you go.
LJ.
So we brought up this header file here.
And it's full of documentation comments,
which is really great, and we love them,
and we want you to use them,
and we want to use them more than we do.
But sometimes when you just want to
see the methods that are in the file,
they're kind of in the way.
So we also have a menu command
to hide all the block comments.
And so now you can just see the methods
without any of that extra stuff.
[Transcript missing]
So find and replace.
Obviously you'd want it
to unfold what you get to.
So here it unfolded the method,
it unfolded the method below.
So it automatically unfolds to
get you where you need to be.
Okay.
Thanks Dave.
So obviously there are a lot of
new features and functions in
there and there are obviously
new controls and preferences
for controlling those functions.
We will have controls for setting your
syntax coloring in the final product.
The syntax coloring, as Dave said,
isn't in the preview that you have,
but it'll be in the final product.
There are controls for showing or
hiding the code folding ribbon.
It's actually called the code
sidebar in the version you have
in the CodeSense preferences.
There are preferences for CodeSense
code completion for whether to
automatically complete inline and if so,
to do so with a delay or without a delay.
Those are in the CodeSense
preference panel.
And there are some other controls
about code folding in the text editing
and indentation preference panes.
So let's talk about the next phase
of streamlining your workflow.
Streamlining building and debugging.
Building and debugging have
been vexing for people not
only because they take so long,
but because they require so
much window manipulation.
Bringing this window up,
bringing that window up,
it's hard to see your errors and
enough text at the same time in
order to get a sense of context.
Sometimes when you're building Universal,
you get two errors in every file,
so you get twice as many
errors to wander through.
And then in debugging,
you're constantly switching back and
forth between your application under test
and your software to trace through it.
There's going to be an entire
session on debugging coming up later.
I strongly recommend you go to that.
They're going to go through a
lot more of the steps there.
But we're going to talk a little
bit here about streamlining,
building, and debugging.
The first thing is that we have
introduced message bubbles,
a kind of annotation to your source code.
This is a generic architecture that we're
going to use a lot more in the future.
Initially, it's for errors, warnings,
and breakpoints.
And what it allows us to do is to take
an external data source of anything
that pertains to your text file,
anything that can give us line and column
information about text in your sources,
and we can inject it right in the source
in a seamless and transparent way.
So that you can scroll through it,
you can codefold over it,
you can do anything you like,
and that the annotations,
the message bubbles,
are not saved to your backing file,
but instead are metadata that
come from some other source.
So it lets us give you an overlay of
information on top of your source code,
especially information that's
kind of ephemeral or transitory,
like warnings.
You want them there when you fix them.
You want them to go away.
So you just want a way to
see them in your source code.
source code, and then when they're fixed,
to just go away.
We have really worked on
the workflow of building and
debugging with message bubbles.
We have wired up the
next build warning error,
previous build warnings error,
so it will step through every error and
warning in your project and bring up the
right file and scroll you right to the
position and show you the text of the
error right there along with your source
code so you don't have to go anywhere.
Just one key, command equals,
will take you quickly through all
of the warnings in your project.
We've really worked on streamlining
the workflow of building and debugging.
We have a streamlined debugging
model where not only are the debug
window and the console window and the
standard I/O window now all unified
so that they're all the same thing,
but also the debug and run
commands are the same thing.
If you have breakpoints on,
command Y debugs.
If you have breakpoints off,
command Y just runs your application.
Un-command key, it does what you want.
When you're debugging,
we try to keep you in your
source code as much as possible.
So we have the debug bar at the top
of any source code window that you're
debugging and it has all of the basic
controls you need for debugging.
You can step, you can pause,
you can continue,
you can look at your stack frame
and you can navigate to other
stack frames or other threads
right there in your source code.
And you have the basic debug
information in a message bubble
right there in your source code.
Right now only the enable/disable
checkbox is operative,
but we'll have essentially the
full breakpoint interface right
there in your source file.
So you can stop, expand the bubble,
set breakpoint conditions,
put in breakpoint actions, for example,
to evaluate something on a
breakpoint or print a log message,
and do it right in your source
code without having to go to a
separate breakpoints window or
the separate debugger window.
We can also show you the value
of variables in the data tips,
which are not just tool tips,
but they are a completely
hierarchically structured inspector
of your program's data space
right there in your text editor.
I think you're going
to be amazed by this.
So Dave's going to come up again and
we're going to show you message bubbles,
the debug strip, and data tips.
All right, well,
we need to build the project.
Ah.
Which I gratefully forgot to
do before I left the stage.
Luckily.
Luckily, these are fast machines.
This is a dual-core power
PC and it's quite fast.
Yep, that's right.
So did we build?
We are building.
Okay,
so this project is actually two projects.
There's a framework project that has 30,
40 files in it or so.
And then there's the project itself,
the main application.
So it takes a second to build.
Oh, build succeeded,
but there's warnings.
How did that happen?
Turns out there were
warnings ahead of time.
There's a lot of pound
warnings in this project.
We also made a little modification.
So let's go ahead and go to
the next build error warning,
command equals.
And it takes you right to that warning.
Little hard to see,
these are optimized for a regular screen,
not for display up on the big wall.
Let's go ahead and go down
through a few more warnings here.
Keep going, let's get back into the
XJ document file again.
Detect Music Now.
So this particular method
is inside of this file.
So why don't you go ahead
and fold all the methods.
And just so you know,
when you're folding methods,
if you're inside of a method currently,
it doesn't fold that method for you.
It figures you're trying
to hide the other stuff.
So let's go down and see
if we can find that method,
detect music now.
And there it is down at the bottom.
And we want to move that.
So since we've folded,
it's a lot easier to find the method.
We can just drag it up to the top.
We'll put it somewhere above
that particular method,
perhaps even near the top of the file.
There we go.
And we can build again.
and the warning is gone.
So, all right.
So let's see.
We want to do some debugging.
So let's go to the control
text and editing method.
There we go.
Let's go ahead and set a breakpoint.
Actually, before we do that,
let's go up into the
file navigator there.
There's a pop-up menu over to
the right that will allow us to
hide those errors and warnings.
So we don't need to have them there.
You can hide them.
They do remain hidden
once you've hidden them.
And let's go ahead and show breakpoints.
So here it is in line.
So it turns out actually the auto
continue checkbox also works.
Both checkboxes work.
The condition text field does
not work at the moment for these.
But I guess let's go ahead and debug.
So we'll bring up Xjournal here.
I don't know if we explained this.
It's actually an editor for
live journal blog posts.
We don't need that particular window.
We want to go in and add
a new entry to our blog.
And we'll add a name to the music field.
and it'll hit the breakpoint.
So, we're here in the debugger,
but we're really just here in the editor,
aren't we?
So this bar at the top of the text view
there has all the information you need.
It's got a threads pop-up on the left.
You can see there's
multiple threads there.
It's got the stack
trace over on the right.
Let's go ahead and go down to one
of the other methods and back up.
and all the buttons to continue, pause,
all that sort of stuff,
the standard stuff.
You can get to the console
window right from here.
So let's go ahead and
look at a notification.
So we have data tips, right?
Now you've seen these
in other IDEs perhaps.
I've seen them in other IDEs certainly.
And usually they're very simple.
They just have a little tool tip
that describes the basic information.
But that's not enough.
I mean structures are big.
They have lots of stuff in them.
So let's go ahead and over...
A notification actually
doesn't have much in it,
does it?
It has an "is a" field and that's it.
Well, in order,
a lot of Objective-C objects and
in fact core foundation objects
as well have description methods.
So you can get to that description
method if you move over.
The two upward and downward pointing
triangles brings up a contextual menu.
And let's go ahead and print the
description into the console.
So this is a way to get that
information in the console.
The console will always be a
useful feature in the debugger.
You can do a lot of your
stuff inside the editor,
but really there's so much there in GDB.
Sorry, we just kind of love it.
It's a little weird.
So let's go ahead and look at
something a little more interesting.
NS Text Field is a good one.
So hover over the little
triangle on the left.
It brings up the field.
Let's go up to the underscore
bounds field at the very top.
and hover over that triangle over there.
It actually gave you a description of it,
but you can go down multiple levels.
and just get to anything you want to see.
So you don't have to have that field
taking up your whole window all the time.
When you need to look at
the value of something,
you hover over it and get to it.
But it's not just for variables.
Let's go ahead and select a--
Arrange down there.
Yeah, self-entry.
That's a good place to go.
So we can also evaluate
expressions in these fields.
So if you hover over them,
it knows that the expression looks
a little dangerous so it doesn't
automatically evaluate that,
but it puts up this little info button.
If you click on the info button,
then it will bring up the field and
then you can go down and inspect it.
If it's an expression that it
doesn't know how to evaluate,
it doesn't end up bringing up the field.
So we need to give some feedback.
In the final version,
we'll do a little bit better job of that.
But right now,
you can actually evaluate all
sorts of expressions there.
You don't need this separate
expressions window either.
All right, let's see.
I think that's probably good.
Yeah.
Thanks, Dave.
[Transcript missing]
Thank you, Chris.
OK,
I'd like to show you a little bit about
the research assistant and the new
features in the documentation window.
But let's first look at how you
got to documentation in Xcode 2.0.
The fastest way to get from an
API in your code editor to the
documentation is Option-double-click.
So if we could do that.
And you see, as Chris pointed out,
the documentation window takes
you right where you want to be,
but it obscures the work
that you were currently in.
So the lighter weight solution
is to bring up the research
assistant in Xcode 3.0.
You can get there from the Help menu,
or you can get there with a toolbar item.
So if we can bring that up.
Okay, the research assistant is
this small window that,
as Chris said,
hovers on the screen and listens to
your selection in the code editor.
As you click around in your code,
you can see how it updates to show you
what the current selection is and gives
you some information on that selection.
So if you twist open
a few of those slices,
we can see a little bit more
of what it's showing you.
OK, and if you would select a few
of the methods and classes and
show them how it's updating.
So you can see that the
Research Assistant offers a variety
of information on the selected API.
Let's take a closer look
at exactly what that is.
Starting at the top,
there are three lines of links.
The top one is a link to that
API documentation itself.
And clicking that would
be equivalent to option
double-clicking in your code editor.
It takes you right to that reference.
The next line down takes you
to the enclosing document.
The document, in this case,
the class documentation
for that string class.
If you were looking at a method,
this would be the class
that contains that method.
And the next link down is to the
header file that declares that API.
Clicking that will bring
up the header file,
just as you would bring it up by command
double-clicking in the code editor.
And below those three links
we've got a series of slices,
each one dedicated to a specific topic,
declaration, abstract.
And if you twist open a couple more
like related API and sample code,
Now, this is data-driven and
it's a work in progress.
We have a lot of entries
for certain slices,
other ones we're working on.
For example, the sample code,
we have a few entries,
but we'll be working on that over
time and it'll become a lot more
valuable by the release of Xcode 3.0.
Another area that's quite helpful
is look at that availability slice.
It tells you when an API became available
in Mac OS X and if you would select
that font method near the bottom,
it also tells you about
APIs that have become deprecated.
So if you'd open that slice,
it tells you not only that
the method is deprecated,
but it gives you a reference
to the replacement API.
We really hope that that will help you
bring your projects up to date and make
sure when you're creating a new project
that you don't use deprecated APIs.
So that's the way the research assistant
can bring targeted information to you.
But sometimes, as Chris was saying,
you need to get to the documentation
so you can browse and search it.
And for that we have the
documentation window.
It looks very much like
it did in Xcode 2.0,
but the plumbing's all new.
It's all core data driven and the
metadata is in core data stores.
So what does that mean to you?
Well, the first thing you can see is on
the left at the top under Apple,
there are two documentation sets instead
of the one that you had in Xcode 2.0.
And we're going to be breaking
out further documentation sets.
We no longer require one
monolithic documentation set.
In this case,
we broke out the Java documentation
set from the rest.
And now we have two.
We'll have others by ship.
Now, as Chris clicks between
those two documentation sets,
you'll see that the API list
updates to show you just what's
available in that documentation set.
So that's the first thing you need to do.
And then the second thing
you need to do is you need to
go to the documentation set.
So this
Configuring your work environment,
you'll be able to download and install
just the documentation sets you want
and your searches will be just on those
APIs that are relevant to your project.
Okay, another piece that's new is we've
introduced one more type of search.
We had API search, which you saw here,
full-text search that's
been around for a while.
Now we have title search.
And I think this is going
to be very valuable,
especially if you're looking into
documentation for a new technology
like Core Data or Objective C2.
You can quickly narrow from the
3,000 plus documents down to,
in that case, just the primary entry
point for Objective C2.
So those are the two new features of
documentation access in Xcode 2.0.
3.0, eh?
3.0.
And we're still refining them,
so if you have comments and suggestions,
please let us know.
We want to make sure
it works well for you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Matt.
So we're on the last phase of
our streamlining journey back
to the beginning where we give
up and acquire another project.
Project configuration.
This is where a lot of people
unfortunately spend most or
far too much of their time,
is changing build settings so that
their project actually builds.
Finding the right build setting
among the myriad settings we have
has been a historical problem.
Well, we've made some significant changes
in the build settings inspector
for Xcode 3.0 using some new
technology that's in Leopard and
I think you're going to love it.
We have added searching and sorting
to the build setting inspector.
We have added built-in per architecture
build settings so you don't have
to synthesize your own separate
build settings for PowerPC and 386.
Which is going to become increasingly
important as you now have four
architectures to build for,
not just two.
We support the research assistant
for build settings so you can get
the same kind of documentation on
build settings that you have on APIs.
And just incidentally,
we now support code completion of
build settings in XC config files
so you don't have to go back to the
documentation and copy and paste.
Now one of the big things about
project configuration is that it makes
changes in your project file and your
project file is hidden and opaque.
And it's very hard to see what
changes you've made and the changes
you make often break things,
so you have to roll back to
the previous version and often
you just do it blindly saying,
"Oh, I've screwed this up, throw it away,
go back to the backup."
Backup and Restore.
We have added built-in
backup and restore to Xcode.
You've seen the snapshots
I've been taking all along.
You can go back and look at those
individual snapshots over time to see
the changes you've made and diff them,
not only diffing your
source code changes,
but nib file changes and
project file changes as well to
see what changes you've made.
Now the...
The Snapshot File window is
not as whizzy as Time Machine.
I apologize.
We don't have an animated Starfield
background on our Restore window.
But very simply, every time you make a
snapshot it goes in the list.
And you can pick one from a list
and go back and restore to it.
So if you know what you want to do,
go back to a certain point in time,
a date,
before or after a certain operation,
you can do that with one click.
If you want to see what the changes were,
you can look at the file list
and then see a comparison on
a file-by-file basis as well.
To show you both of those,
I'm bringing up
Scott Tooker of our group.
Thanks, Chris.
One thing I wanted to clarify is we
actually do have searching in Xcode 2.0.
It's not as good as in 3.0
for the build settings.
One new feature that we're not showing
you today that I would encourage people
to try out though is we do support
type completion for include statements.
So anyway, so we've shown you a
lot about the editor.
And so now what we want to
do is turn your focus to
actually the target inspector.
Because this is where-- you don't tend to
spend a lot of time there all the time,
but you tend to deep dive
into it every once in a while,
because you need to get your
project building or you want
to change what architecture,
you want to change something about it,
set up or release, build, et cetera.
So we wanted to make a lot of
changes that would make it a
lot easier for you to get to
information quickly and efficiently.
So one of the first things you'll notice
is that we put the categories-- we
pulled them out of the categories pop-up,
and we put them right into the table.
And so now we actually
have an outline view.
You can collapse categories.
It's much easier to see just the
build settings you want to look at.
Now the next thing I should show you is
that even though it's an outline view,
we still support the
searching and filtering.
So for example,
type debug and I see just the build
settings that deal with debug,
but they're still grouped by category.
So once again,
you can just focus in on one
category and it's much easier to see.
Now if we go ahead and
look at the filter field,
we've also improved that.
Previously in Xcode 2,
what we did is we allowed you to just
search on an amalgam of the description,
the name, and the effective value.
Now we also let you search on
the definition and the category,
but in addition,
we also added the menu so you can
just search on one of those criteria.
And so we think that's going
to be a lot better for people
when they want to find things.
For example, warnings.
You can see here we're just
looking at the one group.
the one category.
So actually let's go back and one more
thing I wanted to say is that we've
replaced the categories pop-up if
you use Xcode 2 with the show pop-up.
And we got rid of all the category items
because they weren't needed anymore,
but we still have,
you can show all settings,
settings defined at this level
and user-defined settings.
So for example, here are all the settings
set in this project.
So let's go back to all settings.
In the search pop-up,
if you can select category,
and type in "warnings."
So you see here now,
we're just looking at one category.
And it's great.
In this case, we can see all the
settings here on one thing.
But it's kind of hard to
see exactly what I have set.
They're kind of spaced apart.
They're not grouped together.
It would be great to group
them together to get them
more organized by their value.
Well, in Xcode 3,
now you can click on the Value column,
and there they are.
They're all grouped at the top.
You can see exactly what you have set.
And if you want to go back to
grouping by alphabetical titles,
you can just click on the titles.
And the nice thing is that if we turn
off the warnings and show you everything,
we actually keep these grouped by
category as you're sorting on them.
So for example, if he clicks on Value,
you'll notice that we're still
keeping the categories grouped
for you to make it really easy to
understand what you're looking at.
So if we look now down at the bottom,
what we used to have is we
used to have an edit button
and a plus and a minus button.
And there were more things
that we needed to add.
For example,
the per architecture settings
that Chris talked about.
So what we decided to do is
when you have an item selected,
we just wanted to have one kind
of pop-up menu that you could use
to act on that selected setting.
So for example,
here if we look at the prefix file,
prefix header, sorry.
And if you go ahead and click,
you'll see that now there are a number
of-- click on the menu and there's
a number of options you can do.
You can edit and delete.
You could edit that setting, for example,
and that will bring up the sheet.
And you can type in things here.
At this time,
you could also go there and you could
delete the setting defined at this level.
You could also add
per-architecture settings and
add per-user defined settings.
One note about per-architecture settings.
We'll be talking about this
more in other sessions,
but I should note that we actually
look at the build setting and we will
either have it enabled or disabled
depending on what the build setting is.
So we don't allow you to set
a per-architecture setting
when it makes no sense.
So if we actually go and
select Prefix Header,
we're now using the new AppKit style
of editing in tables and outline views.
All you need to do is select
and click in the cell you want
to edit and you're right in.
It's very Finder-like, it's very simple,
and we think you'll really like it.
So in doing all this,
we also realized that we really wanted
to expand the kind of help information
that we had for build settings.
And that little split view we
had just wasn't going to cut it.
There was just too much
we wanted to show you,
too much we wanted to link back to,
and we wanted more structure.
So what we did instead is we just
got on the research assistant train.
And so now you can click on research
assistant and we'll actually track
with the selected build setting.
And you can see right now,
just as a beginning,
we show you the actual build setting.
So you can see the name and an abstract,
the help text description.
But in the future,
we definitely want to flesh that out
with both deprecation information,
related build settings,
related documentation,
even potentially sample code.
So I've been at Xcode a long time.
I actually worked on
Project Builder before Xcode,
before Project Builder
with Xcode or whatever.
But one of the things we did when
we moved to Xcode is we started
showing you effective values.
And this was great because you could see
what things were going to actually be.
It was much,
in some ways it was much better
than showing the definitions.
But the flip side was there were times
when you wanted to see the definitions
because either it was clearer because
of the structure or you may have had
one build setting related to another.
And while it's true that
when you edit you can see the
definition of what you're editing,
that isn't really useful when you want to
see all your settings kind of in context.
So now what you can do is you can
control click on the table itself
and we give you two new options.
The first is show definitions.
What this allows you to do if you
select it is that we'll actually change
over and show you all the definitions.
And you'll notice that we've also
gone through and made the pop-ups
and the checkboxes strings.
And while it doesn't work in
the preview you have right now,
the intention for the GM is that
you would also be able to set
things like pop-ups and strings
to other build setting values.
So you can get some of the value
of config files where you could set
a yes or no value to another build
setting right in the inspector.
The other thing we added was we added
the ability to show you the raw names
because sometimes you're dealing with
a config file where you need to pass
something to Xcode build or a script.
And so now you can do show setting names
and we actually show you the settings.
So the nice thing is is that
during all of this research
assistance is still working for you.
So if you get confused by the raw name
and you know it by the title or you know
it by the title but not the raw name you
can always look at research assistant
and it will have all the information.
So let's go ahead.
I think we wanted to change.
Did you change the build setting?
Yeah.
Excellent.
So one of the other problems is that when
you go in and you change build settings,
sometimes it's kind of hard.
You're going through,
you're trying a bunch of stuff,
and you're like, oh, that worked.
Oh, that gave me the result I wanted.
That didn't quite work.
And you might want to go back and forth.
And so that's where snapshots
can be really useful.
So what we've been doing this
whole time is doing a bunch of
snapshots just to kind of show you
what the possibilities are here.
And you'll notice here
with the snapshot windows,
we have a list of the snapshots.
And they each have a
name that you can set.
In fact,
we can rename this one right now to say,
made build setting change.
You can also provide comments.
And we also give you the date and
where it was actually archived.
So let's go ahead and
choose one of these.
And we're going to want to-- after he.
So let's go choose one.
We can go ahead and
we can show the files.
Now, as you've probably seen in
some of the other demos,
Once Chris decides which one he
wants to look at... This one.
We can actually look at the
different types of files.
And what you may have seen in the
demos before is that not only can
we show you differences here with
like header files and source files,
is we can also show nib files and
more importantly for this demo,
we can show you the project file changes.
So for example,
here's a .m file and you can see this
is where we actually moved some code.
We also did some white space
changing when we put in the F1.
So if we go ahead and we
look at the PBX project,
you see, there we go.
There's where Chris added
in his new warning.
And we think this will be really
helpful because one of the things that
we're working hard to do is we want to
make it really easy to understand what
changes you're making to your project
and how those are affecting you.
And while this isn't the complete answer,
we hope this is a step along the
way to getting to a clearer Xcode,
a little bit that's more transparent
and easier for you to use.
And then finally, yes, I know Chris,
I know, we want to restore.
So if you've ever reverted a project,
one thing to note about restore is this
is going to go back and that's not a bug,
it's actually intentional.
Just like when we revert a project,
we're tearing down the project
entirely and we're bringing it back up.
And see, there it is.
Thank you, Scott.
We've made a couple of other workflow
improvements that you may enjoy in
the course of working on Xcode 3.0.
We'll probably make more
before we get to the final.
We've got a little time
before Leopard ships.
We need to get the bugs
out of this version.
Obviously,
it's a developer preview and we
have to smooth off some of the
rough edges on what we've done,
but we also want to do a
little bit more for you.
We have added a project compatibility
setting in the project Git info box.
On any project,
you can set whether you want this to
be an Xcode 3.0 project or whether
you want it to be compatible with 2.x.
And if you set it compatible with 2.x,
anytime you use a 3.0 feature
that won't work on 2.x,
an alert box will come up and tell
you that you can change the project
compatibility to 3.0 and take the
change or you can cancel the change.
So you know if you're making a change,
that will make your project
incompatible with 2.x.
That's going to be even more important
when we get 2.x running on Leopard,
so you can have Xcode 2.x and
Xcode 3.0 running side by side,
sharing the same projects.
Second thing is,
you saw a little bit of it,
we can now search in nib files
in the Project Find dialog.
If you have key value coding
constants in your nib files,
Project Find will find them as well.
So if you're looking for a method name,
the nib files are completely indexed
and anything you can find in the index,
you can find in Project Find and
that includes nib files.
We've added a recent files menu.
Now this is under a user default.
You go to the expert preferences setting
and you read the first line there and
it will tell you how to turn it on.
I won't.
This is the standard Cocoa recent files
manual and you'll find that for program
editing it is to some degree suboptimal.
Cocoa throttles it to 10 entries.
You can set another standard NS document
defaults right to increase it to 50,
but every file you touch
will be put in here.
We're going to do a better job
on this by the release product,
but in case you want a
recent files menu in Xcode,
you can in Xcode 3.0,
you can turn on this expert preference
and get the recent files menu in Xcode.
We've also fixed the doc menu so
that you can pop up the doc menu and
you get the full list of projects
and windows inside your doc menu,
just like any other application.
These are minor workflow improvements,
but from the email I see and from
the duplicate bug reports I process,
these things are just annoying people
and we want to get as many annoying
things as we can out of the way.
To streamline your workflow:
acquiring and editing projects,
building and debugging,
rewriting and researching,
reconfiguring and
restoring your projects,
we want to allow you to focus on your
work and to find and filter to get
to the information you need quickly.